# 🔑 Licenses
In 1886, 10 major european empires of that time have convened in Bern, Switzerland to protect the rights of artists, architects and the commonman. This was done primarily to counter the companies of that time, which would steal artists' work in one country and modify, resell it under their own name in another. Prior to this convention to avoid this, the artist had to explicitly state Copyright and then go on to defend it in Court on their own.

<!-- truncate -->

However, after the Berne Convention (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Berne_Convention), Copyright was automatically asserted as soon as the work was created. As in, as soon as someone creates something, the work is already copyrighted and thus it'll be protected. This work includes anything from text, text messages, pictures, logos all the way to architectural plans and maps. The Berne Convention has now been ratified in most countries of the world 181/193.

But then, why do you keep seeing ©, (c) and Copyright signs everywhere? There are two reasons.
First, in USA they didn't ratify the convention until 1970s, but instead they opted to make copyright assertions easier, by creating the © sign and requiring its presence on any work of art alongside the name of the artist and the date of release. Because of this, until the 1970s you were required to put © on all your products for them to be copyrighted in US. After the 1970s it's no longer needed since the copyright is asserted automatically like everywhere else.

Second, the reason why artists and companies insist on using the © and/or Copyright is because explicit statements make it easier to defend your copyright in court.

Extra: Why (c) ?, because some typewriters didn't have the © sign so it'd get replaced by (c).

All copyrights, trademarks and patents are recognized by all the 181 members of this convention, it's international. The word "Copyright" must always be written in English.

Trademarks TM are a way of registering your brand name, logo or your slogan with the government so that the product that you release can have an official verification of it being genuine. Coca-Cola is a Trademarked brand name, you can't release your own cola under that name so you can't fool any potential customer into buying your product instead. You have to however, renew the Trademark with your government by paying for it.

The Registered ® symbol, means that the TM has been officially registered by the US government.

Patents are a way of registering your technological innovation with the government by publishing the idea behind it publicly however, getting a 20 year right enforced by the state, to be the sole producer of the given innovation. It's supposed to reward and incentivize innovation by giving the innovator a headstart for 20 years, so that they can capitalize on their idea and earn money alone. However, after 20 years your patent expires and can not be renewed. Meaning every other company can now produce the same innovation themselves using your blueprints and ideas since you had to make them public to apply for the patent in the first place.

Now onto what Copyright does in effect, and what Licenses are.

Copyright stands for what it says in the name, Copy Right. By default, the Copyright extremely restrictive, it's All Rights Reserved. Meaning that you can't copy, modify or redistribute whatever it is.

Copyrights last for the duration of the lifetime and the next 70 years after the Copyright holder's death, after which the Copyright expires and it becomes Public Property, free to use.

If you however, want to share the work that you created, you have to use Licenses, they're a lease given by you, that allows someone else to be able to interact with your work to the capacity that you allow in the said License. You're incentivized to use officially registered licenses and not create your own, since said licenses have already been defended in court and both you and the consumer will have an easier time figuring out the rights if it's a common license.

There are many different types of licenses for different things, software is considered to be "Text Material" and has its own commonly used set of open source licenses.

The most commonly used license nowadays is the MIT License which is very open and allows anyone to copy, edit and republish your work with no attribution and also use it in proprietary software and for monetary income. This is the license that companies like to work with when the work is open sourced since it allows them to use the program anywhere and anyhow.

Another common open license is Apache 2.0 which is rather similar but deals in patents more precisely. Similarly the ISC license is used extensively in many NPM packages.

There are also meme licenses like the Unlicense and Do What the F*** You Want To License (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WTFPL) which relinquish all rights to the given work, but it's not advised to use them since they haven't been defended in Court and aren't taken seriously.

Then there are more restrictive licenses like the ones made by the Free Software Foundation by Richard Stallman, the founder of GNU Project; Like the GPL. Linux for example, is licensed under GPLv2 and more recently released programs are often licensed under GPLv3. There's also LGPL which stands for the Lesser General Public License which is more used for software libraries. Then there's AGPLv3 Affero General Public License which is GPLv3 but it additionally covers software that's shared over Networks like websites. It is also considered to be the strongest, most restrictive open source license.

For the differences between these and many other licenses go and read about them specifically since *I am not a lawyer.**
Below is a great website to help you pick a license most appropriate for your software:
https://ufal.github.io/public-license-selector

Now, when it comes to GitHub; Just because you published something publicly on GitHub that doesn't make it FOSS (Free and Open Source). Free as in "Libre" -> Free to Copy/Modify/Redistribute. It's only OSS, someone can look at your code and use it, but since it has no license, it is fully copyrighted by you and they can only look at it, unable to change or work with it.

To make your work FOSS and closer to the spirit of Open Source, you have to license it. You do this by adding a LICENSE file to your software package/repository. You can go further as incentivized by the GPL and also put up a Copyright notice in the beginning of your scripts. However, the LICENSE file is necessary for the whole program to be considered licensed.

To add a LICENSE follow these instructions
https://docs.github.com/en/communities/setting-up-your-project-for-healthy-contributions/adding-a-license-to-a-repository

Make sure that once you pick a License, to read up whether or not you can modify it. GPLv3 and AGPLv3 for example, do not allow modification and thus you put the file as is, to be defended by the FSF/GNU for you. But MIT allows edits for example.

After you've successfully picked a License and put the LICENSE file into the root folder of your project, the next step is to put up a Copyright and License Notice into the files themselves. You could mention the License that you're using in the README file, and/or you could put up a notice in the beginning of your text files. Remember that when you specify a License that you're using, it's most appropriate to call it by its official SPDX Identification (https://spdx.org/licenses). For example MIT would be "MIT" and AGPLv3 would be either "AGPL-3.0-only" or "AGPL-3.0-or-later".

Also, when you're putting up a copyright notice it's best to consult with the License creators on how it has to look like, sometimes an example notice would be put right in the License file itself like in GPLv3.

Here's how you'd comment a License notice in a JavaScript file as instructed by the JSDoc initiative and encouraged by TypeScript
https://jsdoc.app/tags-license.html

Remember: A License file placed in the project root folder is a must.

Why take all these measures? License file may get separated from the source code, however, with copyright notices the program licensing and permissions are more explicit and permanent.
